---

title: "Component Readiness"
description: Documentation on Sippy's Component Readiness UI for determining our ability to ship a release.
---

[Component Readiness](https://sippy.dptools.openshift.org/sippy-ng/component_readiness/main) is one of the newest and most important portions of Sippy. Component Readiness analyzes huge quantities of test data comparing the last week (by default) of the current dev release, against the last month leading up to GA for the most recent stable release. It uses [Fisher's Exact Test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher%27s_exact_test) to determine if any test is failing statistically more often than it was.

Filters on the left can be used to adjust the parameters of the query. By default, we do not include all variants.

Component Readiness is now one of the main requirements for being ready to ship a release.

## Component Report

The Component Report is the initial view presented when you load the Component Readiness UI. At the top level, it shows if a component (row) is safe to ship or not for the selected variant combinations (columns). This is calculated by examining all the tests aligned with that component, grouped by the job variants. If Fisher's Exact Test tells us there is a statistically significant difference in the pass rate when compared to the basis, the cell will be marked red.

Red indicates a problem is detected with at least one test within that component/feature, while green indicates we see no significant evidence of regression. By design, there is no in-between (yellow).

Clicking a cell drills down further, first to a breakdown by feature/capability, then by test for a capability, until eventually you arrive at the Test Details page (see below).

Take special note of the "Show Regressed Tests" table at the top of every component report page. This lists *only* the regressed tests within the current report with some details on when the regression was first detected in the default report and a shortcut to the Test Details page.

Parameters for the report can be adjusted on the left-hand side of the UI, but a default view is presented on load and this is our primary "release readiness" view. We hope to expand the variants included by default over time as they are proven safe and stable enough to be there. A mechanism for custom report views is in development.

## Test Details

Navigating from the report page down to the test details page for a regressed test can be done either by clicking through the red cells in the report or by using the test table in the top right of each report. The test details page will display the data backing the decision to mark a test as regressed, including a great visualization of which jobs the failures are appearing in. This page also contains a button to file a new Jira for an issue, and lists all open linked Jiras. (*NOTE*: Jiras are linked by mentioning the test name in the description or a comment). It is important for visibility in the organization to ensure that your component has a linked active bug when it is regressed, as per above Component Readiness is blocking for release unless an exception is granted by senior management.

## Additional / Future Tooling

TRT currently has a manual triage tool available which can (a) scan for runs affected by an infrastructure problem and remove them from consideration (possibly flipping a component back to green), or (b) find runs failing on a specific bug and attribute them to that bug (flagging them with a separate icon indicating all test failures are triaged). A web interface to allow teams to perform (b) is being developed.

## Alerting on Component Regressions

TRT has implemented tooling that allows component teams to have alerts sent to a Slack channel of their choice when their component goes regressed. See [tooling](../tooling/) for more details.

## How Results Appear in Component Readiness

  1. Ensure your job is running in prow and [named appropriately](/how-tos/naming-your-ci-jobs/).
  1. Ensure your job is categorized properly in the Sippy [Variant Registry](https://github.com/openshift/sippy/tree/master/pkg/variantregistry).
      * Variants are calculated by parsing the job name, and in some cases reading from cluster-data.json artifacts generated by the job itself.
      * Variants control how the job results are grouped with other jobs, so it is important to ensure they do so correctly and in ways that TRT can predict and handle.
      * If you need to differentiate your job somehow and do not yet see a variant that logically allows for it, reach out and we can possibly add a new variant key.
      * Variants for a job can be viewed in the [Sippy Job List](https://sippy.dptools.openshift.org/sippy-ng/jobs/4.17).
      * Variant registry is updated daily by running the code linked above and syncing to BigQuery.
  1. Ensure your job outputs junit XML artifacts as origin does. (Look for junit xml files such as those found in paths similar to `/artifacts/e2e-gcp-ovn/openshift-e2e-test/artifacts/junit/` on most jobs)
  1. Ensure your test names properly map to components using the [ci-test-mapping repo](https://github.com/openshift-eng/ci-test-mapping).
      * Custom logic can be added here, but is not required if following the recommended path by including the jira component in the test name (`[Jira:"Cluster Version Operator"] test something`).
      * Tests can be further aligned to features/capabilities.
      * Test mapping is updated daily and synced to BigQuery.


As your job runs, a Google Cloud function monitors for GCS artifact writes and detects junit XML files, parses them, and uploads them to a massive BigQuery table. The job variant data, and component/feature test mapping data are both then joined in based on the job/test name. (meaning they can be adjusted and tuned retroactively even after the job has started producing results) At this point, your job should be feeding Component Readiness depending on the variants selected in your search.

Because we consider the default Component Readiness view to be release binding, we have to be careful what is included there. Variants must be explicitly included by default. Sippy's upcoming [Server Side Views feature](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRT-1574) will better codify the default view, as well as make it possible for teams to submit their own views via a pull request until such a time as they can promote to the default view.
